Title: Silence of the Rounds: Why Silencers Make Everyone Safer
Date: 2013-01-12 23:19
Author: Admin
Category: Politics
Tags: guns, Politics

With all the debate surrounding firearms in the recently weeks, I
happened about a discussion with my pro-gun friend about suppressors.
Mostly commonly known as *silencers*, or the long black cylinder on the
end of James Bond's gun in the movies. He seemed asked me the most worn
out retort in gun debates across the country:

*"But why would you ever need one (a silencer)?"*

</p>

This was not an unforgivable question; but surprising one, considering
he is a firearm owner and regular shooter. You see, many gun control
advocates propose solutions based on false premises, and 'silencer' laws
are no exception. It doesn't help that even modern day
gun enthusiasts are willing to concede that they are dangerous. It's
easy pray for people like [Alexander Zaitchik, who wrote a scathing
article on the NRA's recent call for supressor regulation
relaxation.][]{{1}} When it comes to banning anything, I never ask
myself why should we have it. I ask "why not?".

</p>

The Why {style="text-align: left;"}
-------

</p>
For those who have never shot a firearm before, you should consider what
these machines are capable of doing. In very simple terms: you pull the
trigger which ignites a primer and then gunpowder, which forces the
bullet out of the gun along the trajectory of the barrel. These bullets
exit the barrel at very high velocities typically measured in many
multiples of the speed sound. This causes a sonic boom, or displaced,
compressed shock wave, similar to that produced by supersonic aircraft.
But because the bullet is so small relative to an aircraft, it is not
nearly as loud (though still very noticeable). If you never either fired
a gun or sat on a tarmac, you will never even experience hearing
anything of that level of volume. When you see actors firing guns on
television and in movies, they wear no ear protection, yet never once
flinch and walk away in perfect health. Please realize that you are not
hearing or seeing real gun fire. What you hear through your speakers is
far less than what you would hear even with ear protection at any firing
range.

Actually discharging a firearm can cause serious damage to your hearing.
The ancillary benefit is that other can hear the discharge and call for
help or react if necessary. What I will try and prove is that perceived
ability of silencers is far from reality and that they are far more
useful to law abiding citizens than anyone seeking to cause harm.

The Facts
---------

</p>

Most common firearms all produce decibel ratings within a fairly common
range of 150-165db, depending on caliber and barrel.{{2}} We can assume
a decibel rating of 150db.

</p>

To understand how much damage that can do to the human ear:

</p>
**Hearing Damage Risk Levels in Decibels:{{3}}**

-   **85 dB:** Beginning of OSHA regulations
-   **90 dB:** Risk of Hearing Damage After **8 Hours** of Sound
    Exposure

    </p>

    -   Lawn Mower
    -   Truck Traffic

    </p>
    <p>
-   **95 dB:** Risk of Hearing Damager After **4 Hours** of Sound
    Exposure

    </p>

    -   Motorcycle
    -   Power Saw

    </p>
    <p>
-   **100 dB:** Risk of Hearing Damage After **2 Hours** of Sound
    Exposure

    </p>

    -   Chainsaw
    -   Stereo Headphones

    </p>
    <p>
-   **105 dB:** Risk of Hearing Damage After **1 Hour** of Sound
    Exposure

    </p>

    -   Jackhammer
    -   Helicopter

    </p>
    <p>
-   **110 dB:** Risk of Hearing Damage After **30 Minutes** of Sound
    Exposure

    </p>

    -   Snowmobile from Driver Seat

    </p>
    <p>
-   **115 dB:** Risk of Hearing Damage After **15 Minutes** of Sound
    Exposure

    </p>

    -   Baby's Cry
    -   Stadium Football Game

    </p>
    <p>
-   **120 dB:** Risk of Hearing Damage After **7.5 Minutes** of Sound
    Exposure

    </p>

    -   Rock Concert
    -   Sandblasting

    </p>
    <p>
-   **140 dB:** **Immediate Hearing Damage**

    </p>

    -   Gunshot
    -   Jet Engine Taking Off

    </p>
    <p>

</p>

In other words, any discharge from a firearm without hearing protection
*IMMEDIATELY* begins to cause hearing damage. Sustained or repeated
exposure (i.e. repeated gunshots) worsens the damage. My personal ear
protection, with one of the highest decibel ratings I could find,
reduces this by *30db*, bringing the level to *120db,* but outside of
the immediate danger zone. Since most muzzle noise exposure is for
milliseconds, we can be confident that our ears are safe.

</p>

And what about silencers? How much noise is that soft "punk" out of
Bond's gun that lets him sneak around undetected? Since those bad guys,
could presumably hear someone talking, we can make an educated guess
from the movie, that it should be well below the 65 decibels of human
speech. Well, according to independent tests{{4}}, firearm suppressors
reduce noise by an average of -- suprise, suprise -- *30db*. Or, just
enough to not cause immediate, irreparable hearing damage. Consider that
for a moment, putting a silencer on your gun is the equivalent of giving
everyone in the area ear protection. Even then, our chart indicates that
we'd still be exposed to a level of noise equivalent to a live concert,
clearly enough for anyone within range of the firearm to hear.

</p>

The Why Not {style="text-align: left;"}
-----------

</p>
So to answer my friend's question, a silencer could easily be used to
assist someone who is using a gun in their home for self defense. No one
is going to wait to put on their ear protection in an emergency, but
they could keep the suppressor on their home defense firearm.
Additionally, suppressors reduce the risk of harm in defending, say, a
child's bedroom. They also reduce muzzle flash and make it less like to
induce disorientation.

Would they enable someone to sneak around and dispatch people
undetected? **Absolutely not.**

Do they make firearms silent or more dangerous? **No**.

Do they make firearms safer to discharge? **Yes**.

Beware of Truth
---------------

</p>
I implore anyone who reads this to please do research on all the facts
before decided to strip rights away from others. On the matter of gun
control, more than any other, I find that people are willing to
compromise critical thinking for confirmation bias. That makes everyone
less safe.

Luckily suppressors are not entirely illegal, but they are not easily
accessible. They require federal registration and a long waiting period.
They are also not transferrable or legal in certain states.

[[1]]Silencers: The NRA’s latest big lie,
<http://www.salon.com/2012/12/30/silencers_the_nras_latest_big_lie>[[1]]

</p>

[[2]]Gunfire Sound
Levels, <http://www.freehearingtest.com/hia_gunfirenoise.shtml>[[2]]

</p>

[[3]]Hearing Damage Sound Chart,
<http://expecttohearbetter.com/hearing-damage-sound-chart.html>[[3]]

</p>

[[4]]Silencer's are not
silent, <http://www.todayifoundout.com/index.php/2010/11/gun-silencers-dont-make-them-anywhere-near-silent/>[[4]]

</p>

  [Alexander Zaitchik, who wrote a scathing article on the NRA's recent
  call for supressor regulation relaxation.]: http://www.salon.com/2012/12/30/silencers_the_nras_latest_big_lie/
